docs: add control plane in-depth guide (#3295)
talos-systems/talos: website/content/docs/v0.9/Learn More/control-plane.md

---
title: "Control Plane"
weight: 8
---

> This guide provides details on how Talos runs and bootstraps Kubernetes control plane.

Reviewer: [Grammarly](https://www.grammarly.com) almost fixed my (typical Russian) article dropping problems :)

### High-level Overview

1. Service `etcd` is started on control plane nodes. Instances of `etcd` on control plane build `etcd` cluster.
2. Service `kubelet` is started.
3. Control plane components are started as static pods via the `kubelet`, `kube-apiserver` component connects to local (running on the same node) `etcd` instance.
4. `kubelet` issues client certificate using bootstrap token from control plane endpoint (via `kube-apiserver` and `kube-controller-manager`).
5. `kubelet` registers the node in the API server.
6. Kubernetes control plane schedules pods on the nodes.

### Cluster Bootstrapping

> All nodes start the `kubelet` service. `Kubelet` tries to contact the control plane endpoint, but as it is not up yet, `kubelet` keeps retrying.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All nodes start the `kubelet` service. The `kubelet` tries to contact the control plane endpoint, but as it is not up yet, it keeps retrying.
```

> One of the control plane nodes is chosen as bootstrap node: it is either `init` type node (if using `init` nodes) or `controlplane` node which got promoted to boostrap node using
> `talosctl bootstrap` command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of the control plane nodes is chosen as the bootstrap node.
The node's type can be either `init` or `controlplane`, where the `controlplane` type is promoted using the bootstrap API (`talosctl bootstrap`).
```

> The bootstrap node initiates `etcd` bootstrap process by initializing `etcd` as the first member of the cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The bootstrap node initiates the `etcd` bootstrap process by initializing `etcd` as the first member of the cluster.
```

> Note: there should be only one bootstrap node for the cluster lifetime.

> > Once `etcd` is bootstrapped, bootstrap node has no special role and acts same way as other control plane node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Once `etcd` is bootstrapped, the bootstrap node has no special role and acts same way as other control plane node.
```

> Services `etcd` on non-boostrap nodes triy to get `Endpoints` resource via control plane endpoint, but that request fails as control plane endpoint is not up yet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `etcd` service on non-boostrap nodes tries to get the Kubernetes `Endpoints` resource via the control plane endpoint, but that request fails as control plane endpoint is not up yet.
```

> As soon as `etcd` is up on the bootstrap node, static pod definitions for Kubernetes control plane components (`kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager`, `kube-scheduler`) are rendered to disk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As soon as `etcd` is up on the bootstrap node, static pod definitions for the Kubernetes control plane components (`kube-apiserver`, `kube-controller-manager`, `kube-scheduler`) are rendered to disk.
```

> Service `kubelet` on the boostrap node picks up static pod definitions and starts Kubernetes control plane components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `kubelet` service on the boostrap node picks up the static pod definitions and starts the Kubernetes control plane components.
```

> As soon as `kube-apiserver` is launched, control plane endpoint goes up.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As soon as `kube-apiserver` is launched, the control plane endpoint comes up.
```

> Bootstrap node acquires `etcd` mutex and injects bootstrap manifests into the API server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The bootstrap node acquires an `etcd` mutex and injects the bootstrap manifests into the API server.
```

> Set of the bootstrap manifests specify Kubernetes join token and kubelet CSR auto-approval.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The set of the bootstrap manifests specify the Kubernetes join token and kubelet CSR auto-approval.
```

> Services `kubelet` on all the nodes are now able to issue client certificates for themselves and register nodes in the API server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `kubelet` service on all the nodes is now able to issue client certificates for themselves and register nodes in the API server.
```

> Other bootstrap manifests which got injected specify additional resources critical for Kubernetes operations: CNI, PSP, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other bootstrap manifests specify additional resources critical for Kubernetes operations (i.e. CNI, PSP, etc.)
```

> Service `etcd` on non-bootstrap node is now able to discover other members of `etcd` cluster via `Endpoints` resource and control plane endpoint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `etcd` service on non-bootstrap nodes is now able to discover other members of the `etcd` cluster via the Kubernetes `Endpoints` resource.
```

> `etcd` cluster is formed of `etcd` instances on control plane nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `etcd` cluster is now formed and consists of all control plane nodes.
```

> All control plane nodes render static pod manifests for control plane components, each node runs a full set of components, control plane is now HA.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All control plane nodes render static pod manifests for the control plane components.
Each node now runs a full set of components to make the control plane HA.
```

> Service `kubelet` on worker nodes is able to issue client certficate and register itself in the API server as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `kubelet` service on worker nodes is now able to issue the client certificate and register itself with the API server.
```

### Scaling Up the Control Plane

> When new nodes are added to the control plane, process is the same as bootstrap process above: service `etcd` discovers existing members of the control plane via

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When new nodes are added to the control plane, the process is the same as the bootstrap process above: the `etcd` service discovers existing members of the control plane via the
```

> control plane endpoint, joins the `etcd` cluster, and control plane components are scheduled on the node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
control plane endpoint, joins the `etcd` cluster, and the control plane components are scheduled on the node.
```

### Scaling Down the Control Plane

> Scaling down control plane involves removing a node from the cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scaling down the control plane involves removing a node from the cluster.
```

The most critical part is making sure that the node which is being removed leaves the etcd cluster.

> When using `talosctl reset` command, control plane nodes leaves the `etcd` cluster as part of the reset sequence.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using `talosctl reset` command, the targeted control plane node leaves the `etcd` cluster as part of the reset sequence.
```

### Upgrading Control Plane Nodes

> When a control plane node is upgraded, Talos leaves `etcd` before upgrade, wipes the system disk, installs new version of Talos and reboots.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a control plane node is upgraded, Talos leaves `etcd`, wipes the system disk, installs a new version of itself and reboots.
```

> Upgraded node joins the `etcd` cluster on reboot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The upgraded node then joins the `etcd` cluster on reboot.
```

> So upgrading a control plane node is equivalent to scaling down control plane node followed by scaling up with new version of Talos.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So upgrading a control plane node is equivalent to scaling down control plane node followed by scaling up with a new version of Talos.
```

---
title: "Control Plane"
weight: 8
---

This guide provides details on how Talos runs and bootstraps the Kubernetes control plane.

### High-level Overview

Talos cluster bootstrap flow:

> 1. Service `etcd` is started on control plane nodes. Instances of `etcd` on control plane build `etcd` cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The `etcd` service is started on control plane nodes. Instances of `etcd` on control plane nodes build the `etcd` cluster.
```

> 2. Service `kubelet` is started.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The `kubelet` service is started.
```

> 3. Control plane components are started as static pods via the `kubelet`, `kube-apiserver` component connects to local (running on the same node) `etcd` instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Control plane components are started as static pods via the `kubelet`,  and the `kube-apiserver` component connects to the local (running on the same node) `etcd` instance.
```

> 4. `kubelet` issues client certificate using the bootstrap token using the control plane endpoint (via `kube-apiserver` and `kube-controller-manager`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. The `kubelet` issues client certificate using the bootstrap token using the control plane endpoint (via `kube-apiserver` and `kube-controller-manager`).
```

> 5. `kubelet` registers the node in the API server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. The `kubelet` registers the node in the API server.
```
